Module One
Introduction to Toxicology
1]

Module One
Introduction to Toxicology
Time Allotted: 90 Minutes
Objectives:
Upon completion of this module, the learner will be able to
a Define toxicology and commonly associated terms
a Differentiate the sub-disciplines of toxicology
a Describe the classifications of toxic agents
a Describe the field of toxicology and its application when assessing health effects
associated with toxic agents commonly found at hazardous waste sites
a Understand the roles and responsibilities of various agencies
a Identify potential sources for additional information
12

Presentation Outline
I. Introduction to Toxicology
A. What is Toxicology?
B. The Field of Toxicology
C. Sub-Disciplines of Toxicology
Il. Classification of Toxic Agents
A. Heavy Metals
B. Solvents and Vapors
C. Radiation and Radioactive Materials
D. Dioxin/Furans
E. Pesticides
F. Plant Toxins
G. Animal Toxins
H. Subcategories of Toxic Substances
I. General Classifications of Interest to Communities
HI. Toxicological Information Sources
A. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
B. The United States Environmental Protection Agency
C. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
D. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission
E. The Food and Drug Administration
F. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists
G. Electronic Databases
IV. Contact Information
V. Test Your Knowledge Quiz
VI. Activity Lab
VII. Question and Answer Period
13

Lecture Notes
I. Introduction to Toxicology (1)
A. What is Toxicology?
Toxicology 1s the study of how natural or man-made poisons cause undesirable effects in
living organisms.

a What are harmful or adverse effects? Harmful or adverse effects are
those that are damaging to either the survival or normal function of the
individual.

a What is Toxicity? The word “toxicity” describes the degree to which a
substance 1s poisonous or can cause injury. The toxicity depends on a
variety of factors: dose, duration and route of exposure (see Module Two),
shape and structure of the chemical itself, and individual human factors.

@ Refer to Handout 1-1 - Generaldiagram of routes of exposure and Moduk Two - Routes of Exposure

a What is Toxic? This term relates to poisonous or deadly effects on the
body by inhalation (breathing), ingestion (eating), or absorption, or by
direct contact with a chemical.

a What is a Toxicant? A toxicant is any chemical that can injure or kill
humans, animals, or plants; a poison. The term “toxicant” is used when
talking about toxic substances that are produced by or are a by-product of
human-made activities. For example, dioxin (2,3-7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin {TCDD}), produced as a by-product of certain chlorinated
chemicals, 1s a toxicant. On the other hand, arsenic, a toxic metal, may

14

occur as a natural contaminant of groundwater or may contaminate
groundwater as a by-product of industrial activities. If the second case 1s
true, such toxic substances are referred to as toxicants, rather than toxins.

a What is a Toxin? The term “toxin” usually 1s used when talking about
toxic substances produced naturally. A toxin is any poisonous substance
of microbial (bacteria or other tiny plants or animals), vegetable, or
synthetic chemical origin that reacts with specific cellular components to
kill cells, alter growth or development, or kill the organism.

a What is a Toxic Symptom? This term includes any feeling or sign
indicating the presence of a poison in the system.

a What are Toxic Effects? This term refers to the health effects that occur
due to exposure to a toxic substance; also known as a poisonous effect on
the body.

a What is Selective Toxicity? “Selective toxicity” means that a chemical
will produce injury to one kind of living matter without harming another
form of life, even though the two may exist close together.

a How Does Toxicity Develop? Before toxicity can develop, a substance
must come into contact with a body surface such as skin, eye or mucosa of
the digestive or respiratory tract. The dose of the chemical, or the amount
one comes into contact with, is important when discussing how “toxic” an
substance can be.

15

a What is a dose? The dose is the actual amount of a chemical that enters
the body. The dose received may be due to either acute (short) or chronic
(long-term) exposure. An acute exposure occurs over a very short period
of time, usually 24 hours. Chronic exposures occur over long periods of
time such as weeks, months, or years. The amount of exposure and the
type of toxin will determine the toxic effect.

= What is dose-response? Dose-response is a relationship between
exposure and health effect, that can be established by measuring the
response relative to an increasing dose. This relationship 1s important in
determining the toxicity of a particular substance (2). It relies on the
concept that a dose, or a time of exposure (to a chemical, drug, or toxic
substance), will cause an effect (response) on the exposed organism.
Usually, the larger or more intense the dose, the greater the response, or
the effect. This is the meaning behind the statement “the dose makes the
poison.”

a What is the threshold dose? Given the idea of a dose-response, there
should be a dose or exposure level below which the harmful or adverse
effects of a substance are not seen in a population. That dose is referred to
as the ‘threshold dose’. This dose 1s also referred to as the no observed
adverse effect level (NOAEL), or the no effect level (NEL). These terms
are often used by toxicologists when discussing the relationship between
exposure and dose. However, for substances causing cancer

16

(carcinogens), no safe level of exposure exists, since any exposure could
result in cancer.
a What is meant by ‘individual susceptibility?’ This term describes the
differences in types of responses to hazardous substances, between people.
Each person is unique, and because of that, there may be great differences
in the response to exposure. Exposure in one person may have no effect,
while a second person may become seriously ill, and a third may develop
cancer.
= What is a “sensitive sub-population?” A sensitive sub-population
describes those persons who are more at risk from illness due to exposure
to hazardous substances than the average, healthy person. These persons
usually include the very young, the chronically ill, and the very old. It may
also include pregnant women and women of childbearing age. Depending
on the type of contaminant, other factors (e.g., age, weight, lifestyle, sex)
could be used to describe the population.
B. The Field of Toxicology
Toxicology addresses a variety of questions. For example, in agriculture, toxicology
determines the possible health effects from exposure to pesticides or herbicides, or the
effect of animal feed additives, such as growth factors, on people. Toxicology is also used
in laboratory experiments on animals to establish dose-response relationships. Toxicology
also deals with the way chemicals and waste products affect the health of an individual.
17

C. Sub-disciplines of Toxicology
The field of toxicology can be further divided into the following sub-disciplines or sub-
specialities:

a Environmental Toxicology is concerned with the study of chemicals that
contaminate food, water, soil, or the atmosphere. It also deals with toxic
substances that enter bodies of waters such as lakes, streams, rivers, and
oceans. This sub-discipline addresses the question of how various plants,
animals, and humans are affected by exposure to toxic substances.

= Occupational (Industrial) Toxicology is concerned with health effects from
exposure to chemicals in the workplace. This field grew out of a need to
protect workers from toxic substances and to make their work
environment safe. Occupational diseases caused by industrial chemicals
account for an estimated 50,000 to 70,000 deaths, and 350,000 new cases
of illness each year in the United States (1).

a Regulatory Toxicology gathers and evaluates existing toxicological
information to establish concentration-based standards of “safe” exposure.
The standard is the level of a chemical that a person can be exposed to
without any harmful health effects.

a Food Toxicology is involved in delivering a safe and edible supply of food
to the consumer. During processing, a number of substances may be added
to food to make it look, taste, or smell better. Fats, oils, sugars, starches
and other substances may be added to change the texture and taste of food.

18

All of these additives are studied to determine 1f and at what amount, they
may produce adverse effects. A second area of interest includes food
allergies. Almost 30% of the American people have some food allergy. For
example, many people have trouble digesting milk, and are lactose
intolerant. In addition, toxic substances such as pesticides may be applied
to a food crop in the field, while lead, arsenic, and cadmium are naturally
present in soil and water, and may be absorbed by plants. Toxicologists
must determine the acceptable daily intake level for those substances.

a Clinical Toxicology is concerned with diseases and illnesses associated
with short term or long term exposure to toxic chemicals. Clinical
toxicologists include emergency room physicians who must be familiar
with the symptoms associated with exposure to a wide variety of toxic
substances 1n order to administer the appropriate treatment.

a Descriptive Toxicology is concerned with gathering toxicological
information from animal experimentation. These types of experiments are
used to establish how much of a chemical would cause illness or death.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), use information from these studies to set
regulatory exposure limits.

19

a Forensic Toxicology is used to help establish cause and effect
relationships between exposure to a drug or chemical and the toxic or
lethal effects that result from that exposure.

a Analytical toxicology identifies the toxicant through analysis of body
fluids, stomach content, excrement, or skin.

a Mechanistic Toxicology makes observations on how toxic substances
cause their effects. The effects of exposure can depend on a number of
factors, including the size of the molecule, the specific tissue type or
cellular components affected, whether the substance is easily dissolved in
water or fatty tissues, all of which are important when trying to determine
the way a toxic substance causes harm, and whether effects seen in
animals can be expected in humans.

II. Classification of Toxic Agents (2):
Toxic substances are classified into the following:
A. Heavy Metals
Metals differ from other toxic substances in that they are neither created nor destroyed by
humans. Their use by humans plays an important role in determining their potential for
health effects. Their effect on health could occur through at least two mechanisms: first,
by increasing the presence of heavy metals in air, water, soil, and food, and second, by
changing the structure of the chemical. For example, chromium III can be converted to or
from chromium VI, the more toxic form of the metal.

20

B. Solvents and Vapors
Nearly everyone 1s exposed to solvents. Occupational exposures can range from the use
of “white-out” by administrative personnel, to the use of chemicals by technicians in a
nail salon. When a solvent evaporates, the vapors may also pose a threat to the exposed
population.
@ Have particpants dscuss possbk solents they use ormay be exoosed to dumng the course of a typical day.
C. Radiation and Radioactive Materials
Radiation is the release and propagation of energy 1n space or through a material medium
in the form of waves, the transfer of heat or light by waves of energy, or the stream of
particles from a nuclear reactor (3).
@ An exampek for discussion purposes would be the dropp;nng of the atom ic bomb durng Word War J, or the
Chemobyl Accident nm Russa. These tems can be provided by the presenter.
D. Dioxin/Furans
Dioxin, (or TCDD) was originally discovered as a contaminant in the herbicide Agent
Orange. Dioxin is also a by-product of chlorine processing in paper producing industries.
E. Pesticides
The EPA defines pesticide as any substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest. Pesticides may also be described as any physical,
chemical, or biological agent that will kill an undesirable plant or animal pest (2).
@ Have participants Ist pestcitles they are fam ilar with either through personaluse or n webton to hazardous
chem crak n ther comm unty.
21

F. Plant Toxins (2)
Different portions of a plant may contain different concentrations of chemicals. Some
chemicals made by plants can be lethal. For example, taxon, used in chemotherapy to kill
cancer cells, is produced by a species of the yew plant.
G. Animal Toxins (2)
These toxins can result from venomous or poisonous animal releases. Venomous animals
are usually defined as those that are capable of producing a poison in a highly developed
gland or group of cells, and can deliver that toxin through biting or stinging. Poisonous
animals are generally regarded as those whose tissues, either in part or in their whole, are
toxic.
@ Taner may want to provie examples of venomous animals, such as snakes, spiders, etc., and poisonous animals,
such as puffer fish, or oysters, which may be toxt to some indivilua’s when contam inated with vibrb whifbus.

H. Subcategories of Toxic Substance Classifications
All of these substances may also be further classified according to their:

a Effect on target organs (liver, kidney, hematopoietic system),

= Use (pesticide, solvent, food additive),

= Source of the agent (animal and plant toxins),

a Effects (cancer mutation, liver injury),

a Physical state (gas, dust, liquid),

a Labeling requirements (explosive, flammable, oxidizer),

a Chemistry (aromatic amine, halogenated hydrocarbon), or

22

a Poisoning potential (extremely toxic, very toxic, slightly toxic)
I. General Classifications of Interest to Communities

a Aur pollutants

= Occupation-related

a Acute and chronic poisons
All chemicals (or any chemical) may be poisonous at a given dose and through a
particular route. For example, breathing too much pure oxygen, drinking excessive
amounts of water, or eating too much salt can cause poisoning or death (1).

HI. Toxicological Information Sources (4)
A. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
ATSDR is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It was created by
Congress in 1980 to provide health-based information for use in the cleanup of chemical
waste disposal sites mandated by the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). As the lead agency for implementing the
health-related guidelines of CERCLA, ATSDR assesses the presence and nature of health
hazards at specific Superfund Sites, to help prevent or reduce further exposure and the
illnesses that result from such exposures, and to expand the knowledge-base about health
effects from exposure to hazardous substances.
ATSDR 1s mostly concerned with the health effects that may occur from exposure to
toxic chemicals. ATSDR’s Hazardous Substances and Health Effects Database (HazDat)
23

discusses the issue. ATSDR also publishes Toxicological Profiles (which provide
information on specific chemicals and possible health effects), Case Studies in
Environmental Medicine (which are used to provide information to health care providers
about the toxic effects of chemicals), and Public Health Statements (which contain
information on toxic chemical exposures)(4).
ATSDR’s Division of Toxicology also produces ToxFAQs’™, a series of summaries
about hazardous substances. Information for this series 1s excerpted from the ATSDR
Toxicological Profiles and Public Health Statements. Each ToxFAQ summary is quick
and easy to understand, and answers the most frequently asked questions (FAQs) about
exposure to hazardous substances found around hazardous waste sites and the effects of
exposure on human health. Medical Management Guidelines for Acute Chemical
Exposures (Guidelines) were developed by ATSDR to aid emergency department
physicians and other emergency healthcare professionals who manage acute exposures
resulting from chemical incidents. The guidelines are intended to aid healthcare
professionals involved in emergency response to effectively decontaminate patients,
protect themselves and others from contamination, communicate with other involved
personnel, efficiently transport patients to a medical facility, and provide competent
medical evaluation and treatment to exposed persons.

24

B. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
EPA is responsible for a number of activities, including enforcing federal laws designed
to protect human health and the environment. There are ten regional EPA offices
throughout the United States, with EPA headquarters located in Washington, D.C. Each
regional office 1s responsible within selected states for implementing the agency’s
programs, considering regional needs and implementing federal environmental laws.
Following is a list of the regions and the states they cover.
@ Refer to Figure 1.1 - Map of EPA Regional Offices.
a Region |: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, Vermont
a Region 2: New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands
a Region 3: Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, the
District of Columbia
a Region 4: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee
a Region 5: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin
a Region 6: Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas
a Region 7: Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska
a Region 8: Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah,
Wyoming
25

a Region 9: Arizona, California, Hawaii, Nevada, the territories of Guam
and American Samoa

a Region 10: Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington

The specific chemicals regulated by EPA and the standards associated with them are
found in the Code of Federal Regulations or CFR. The different sections of the CFR are
called Titles, and the ones that apply to EPA are in Title 40 (1). EPA has developed rules
and regulations that activate the requirements of several environmental laws provided
below.

@ Trainer Note: Refer to Tabk 11 whith * a Istof sekcted EPA hws that regubte chem cab ‘4 the environment.
In addition, the following EPA Laws regulate chemicals in the environment:

a The Clean Air Act implements regulations that control and abate air
emissions from stationary and mobile sources.

a The Clean Water Act regulates discharge of pollutants to surface waters.

a The Safe Drinking Water Act establishes standards for contaminants in
drinking water; regulates discharges to underground injection wells, sole
source aquifers, and public drinking water systems.

a The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (CERCLA or Superfund) deals with cleanup of hazardous
waste sites and definition of requirements for response to hazardous waste
spills.

26

a The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) deals with
identification and regulation of hazardous waste treatment, storage, and
disposal.

a The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) requires
registration and testing of pesticides, regulates their sale, distribution, and
use.

a The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) requires testing and reporting
of chemicals prior to manufacturing, distribution, and use; and restricts the
use of chemicals that pose a threat to human health and the environment.

a The Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA)
requires companies to report inventories of hazardous chemicals and toxic
releases; and requires state and local governments to develop plans for
responding to emergency releases.

In addition, EPA’s Office of Research and Development (ORD) studies the effects of
toxic exposure on people and the environment.
C. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
C DC 1s an agency in the Department of Health and Human Services, its mission is to
promote health and quality of life by preventing and controlling disease, injury, and
disability. In the past, the CDC has focused on the study and prevention of infectious
diseases such as malaria and smallpox. However, now its responsibilities have enlarged to
include environmental and occupational hazards.

27

@ Refer particpants to Tabk 12 Candout 13) - CDC Organizational O fives
The CDC Centers that deal with environmental health are the National Center for
Environmental Health (NCEH) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) (2). NCEH addresses hazards associated with chemical exposure inside
and outside the workplace. NIOSH was established by the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970. NIOSH has several functions, including investigating potentially
hazardous work conditions, and evaluating chemical hazards in the workplace. NIOSH is
the only federal institute responsible for conducting research and making
recommendations for the prevention of work-related illnesses and injuries. NIOSH’s
responsibilities include:
a Investigating potentially hazardous working conditions as requested by
employers or employees,
a Evaluating hazards in the workplace, ranging from chemicals to
machinery,
a Creating and disseminating methods for preventing disease, injury, and
disability,
a Conducting research and providing scientifically valid recommendations
for protecting workers; and
a Providing education and training to individuals preparing for or actively
working in the field of occupational safety and health.
28

Information gathered from these activities is used to help reduce disease, injury
and disability in the workplace. The information is provided to OSHA, which uses
it to establish standards to protect health in the workplace.
D. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) (1)
NRC, established in 1974, regulates the use of nuclear materials for commercial,
industrial, academic, and medical purposes. This includes regulating nuclear power
plants, nuclear materials used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, and nuclear
materials used in smoke detectors. NRC also regulates non-power research, test and
training reactors; nuclear fuel cycle facilities (the production of nuclear fuel); and the
transport, storage, and disposal of nuclear materials and waste. Like OSHA and EPA,
NRC obtains and evaluates information about acceptable exposure levels for workers
handling nuclear materials.
E. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (5)
FDA promotes and protects the public health by helping safe and effective products reach
the market in a timely way, and monitoring products for continued safety after they are in
use.
F. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH)
ACGIH 1s a professional organization that produces a listing of Threshold Limit Values
(TLV) and Biological Exposure Indices (BEI) for several hundred chemicals, updating
29

them every year. BEIs are recommended maximum concentrations of various types of

toxic substances, and are guidelines to evaluate the potential health hazards associated

with exposure. The maximum concentration may be measured in blood, urine, or exhaled

air. The TLVs are guidelines for occupational exposure to hazardous chemicals and are

published in a booklet called Threshold Limit Values (TLVs) for Chemical Substances

and Physical Agents and Biological Exposure Indices (6).

G. Electronic Databases

Information on toxic chemicals is available at the following sites:

a Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET - www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov). Several
databases, such as the Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB) and the
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS), can be found
in the TOXNET database. The HSDB has toxicological information on
more than 4,000 chemicals, as well as information on emergency handling
procedures, environmental data, regulatory status, and human exposure.
The RTECS is maintained by NIOSH and contains information on the
health effects for more than 90,000 chemicals.
a CHEMTREC (Chemical Transportation Emergency Center -
www.chemtrec.org). CHEMTREC is provided by the American
Chemistry Council (formerly known as the Chemical Manufacturer’s
Association) and provides information and assistance for emergency
incidents involving chemicals and hazardous materials. CHEMTREC also
30

supplies basic information about the production, shipping, and use of
chemicals and provides information about medical treatment in response
to chemical exposures.

a Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) are available on the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration website: www.osha.gov. MSDSs
provide information such as physical and chemical properties of a
substance, first aid information, emergency response, and disposal
information.

a Hazardous Substances and Health Effects Database (HazDat), available on
ATSDR’s website at www.atsdr.cdc.gov. contains information on
hazardous substances found at National Priorities List (NPL) and non-NPL
waste sites and emergency events, and on the levels at which health effects
from exposure to hazardous substances have been reported in humans and
animals. HAZDAT contains environmental contamination and other data
on more than 3,000 uncontrolled hazardous waste sites for which ATSDR
has conducted public health assessments, prepared health consultations, or
provided responses to emergencies involving releases of toxic substances
into community environments. It contains toxicity information taken from
the ATSDR’s Toxicological Profiles for more than 200 substances most
frequently found at sites (4).

31

IV. Contact Information
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
1600 Clifton Road, NE
Atlanta, Georgia 30333
1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737
Web site: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov
American Conference of Government Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH)
1330 Kemper Meadow Drive, Suite 6000
Cincinnati, OH 45240
513-742-2020
Web site:_http://www.acgih.org
Association of Occupational and Environmental Clinics (AOEC)
1010 Vermont Avenue, NW, Suite 513
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 347-4976
Web site: http://www.aeoc.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
1600 Clifton Rd.
Atlanta, GA 30333
1-800-311-3455
Web site: http://www.cdc.gov
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS)
P.O. Box 12233
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 or
111 Alexander Drive
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
(919) 541-3345
Web site: http://www.niehs.nih.gov
National Toxicology Program (NTP)
P.O. Box 12233
M.D. B2-04
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
(919) 541-0530
Web site: http://ntp-server.niehs.nig.gov
32

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
Directorate of Technical Support
Technical Data Center, Room N-2634
200 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20210
1-800-321-OSHA or 1-800-321-6742
Web site: http://www.osha.gov
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20460
(202) 260-2090
Web site: http://www.epa.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, Maryland 20857
1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
Web site: http://www.FDA.Gov
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
One White Flint North
11555 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852-2738
(301) 415-7000
Web site: http://www.nrc.gov
33

V. Test Your Knowledge Quiz

1. Which of these groups is usually designated as one of the most sensitive sub-populations
for exposures to toxic substances?
a. Adult women c. Adult men
b. Infants d. Adolescents

2. You have worked at a chemical facility for 10 years. The facility does not require
protective equipment, and you have developed a number of serious health affects in the
last 7 years. You are possibly experiencing what type of exposure’?
a. Chronic b. Acute

3. You are worried about contamination of vegetables grown in contaminated soils. What
type of toxicologist would you contact?
a. Descriptive b. Environmental
c. Regulatory d. Food

4. You are concerned about risks associated with growing vegetables in soil with high lead
and arsenic concentrations. You are speaking of what type of substance’?
a. Toxin b. Toxicant

5. The larger the amount of exposure and the greater the dose, the greater the observed
response, or effect.
a. True b. False

6. What type of toxicologist takes samples of your blood, urine and hair for testing?
a. Descriptive b. Analytical
c. Mechanistic d. Forensic

7. Toxic agents can be classified in terms of their physical state, their effects, and their
source.
a. True b. False

34

8. Which agency deals with the health effects that may occur from environmental exposure
to toxic chemicals?
a. The Environmental Protection Agency
b. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
c. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
d. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission
9, Which database has information on emergency handling procedures, environmental data,
regulatory status and human exposure?
a. TOXNET
b. HazDat
c. IRIS
d. CHEMTREC
10. HazDat contains information on hazardous substances found at NPL and non-NPL waste
sites, and on emergency events.
a. True b. False
11. The no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) 1s the same as the no effect level (NEL).
a. True b. False
12. The term toxicant is used when talking about toxic substances that are produced by or are
a by-product of human-made activities.
a. True b. False
35

VI. Activity Lab
In small groups, complete the toxicology cross-word puzzle, using the knowledge gained through
this module.
aaa _
= BERR
oS See
“LE Lo
oS eeeeese|h|hCUre
PUZZLE QUESTIONS
Across
1 toxic substances produced naturally
4 contains information on hazardous substances found at NPL and non-NPL sites
6 the dose or exposure level below which the harmful or adverse effects of a substance
are not seen in a population
7 the differences between two or more persons in the level of their response to exposure
8 implements regulations that control and abate air emissions from stationary and
mobile sources
11 the act of coming into contact with a hazardous substance
12 long-term exposure
36

Down

2 no observed adverse effect level

3 short-term exposure, usually less than 24 hours

5 any chemical that can injure or kill humans, animals, or plants: a poison

6 toxicology data network

9 examines the health effects from exposure to contaminants at NPL and non-NPL sites

10 poisonous or deadly effects on the body by inhalation, ingestion, absorption, or

contact with a chemical

11 deals with the environmental impacts of exposure to hazardous substances

VI. Question and Answer Period
37

HANDOUTS and VISUAL AIDS
MODULE I
38

Figure 1.1 — Map or EPA Regional Offices
| a
FG -
3
£3 ‘
2 7
6 |
10 [2 | seme
1“ Onn
OR
Region 1 — Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont
Region 2 - New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands
Region 3 — Delaware, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West, and the District of Columbia
Region 4— Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Tennessee
Region 5 — Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin
Region 6— Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas
Region 7 — Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska
Region 8 — Colorado, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming
Region 9 — Arizona, California, Hawai, Nevada, and the territories of Guam and American
Samoa
Region 10 — Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington
40

Table 1.1 Selected EPA Environmental Laws
Name Acronym Date Purpose
CAA Implements regulations that control and abate air emissions
Clean Air Act 1970 from stationary and mobile sources
Regulates discharge of pollutants to surface waters.
Clean Water Act CWA 1972
Establishes standards for contaminants in drinking water;

Safe Drinking Water Act SDWA 1974 regulates discharges to underground injection wells,
sole source aquifers, and public drinking water
systems.

Comprehensive Environmental CERCLA 1980 Cleanup of hazardous waste sites and definition of
Response, Compensation, and requirements for response to hazardous waste spills.
Liability Act (Superfund)

Resource Conservation and RCRA 1976 Identification and regulation of hazardous waste treatment,
Recovery Act storage, and disposal.

Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and FIFRA 1948 Requires registration and testing of pesticides; regulates
Rodenticide Act their sale, distribution, and use.

Toxic Substances Control Act TSCA 1976 Requires testing and reporting of chemicals prior to
manufacturing, distribution, and use; restricts the use
of chemicals that pose a threat to human health and
the environment.

Emergency Planning and EPCRA 1986 Requires companies to report inventories of hazardous

Community Right to Know chemicals and toxic releases; requires state and local
Act governments to develop plans for responding to
emergency releases.
41

Table 1.2 Organizations Within the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
| National Center for Environmental Health |
| National Center for Health Statistics |
| National Center for Infectious Disease |
| National Center for Injury Prevention and Control |
| National Center for Prevention Services |
| National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health |
| Epidemiology Program Office |
| International Health Program Office |
| Public Health Practice Program Office |
| National Immunization Program |
42

