Principles of Toxicology — Revised ED3: 10/20/19
Principles of Toxicolog
A Small Dose of Toxicolog
Chapter 2 of
A Small Dose of Toxicology - The Health Effects of Common Chemicals
By
Steven G. Gilbert, PhD, DABT
Institute of Neurotoxicology & Neurological Disorders (INND)
Seattle, WA 98105
E-mail: sgilbert@innd.org
Supporting web site
web: www.asmalldoseoftoxicology.org
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 1 of 24

Introduction
There are three basic and interwoven principles of toxicology: 1) dose-response, 2)
hazard X exposure = risk, and 3) individual sensitivity. While these principles may form
much of the foundation of toxicology, when it comes to any specific substance there is
likely to be controversy. Disagreement may arise on the relative importance of any one of
these principles while trying to evaluate implications for public health. Exploring these
principles is an essential first step before examining their application to any specific
substance. This chapter will explore some of the details and issues surrounding these
principles, but first it is appropriate to put them in historical context.
Basic Principles of Toxicology
Dose-Response
Risk = Hazard X Exposure
Individual Sensitivity

Our ancient ancestors worried about being poisoned ether accidentally or on purpose. The
formal study of poisons (and thus toxicology) began 500 years ago during the
Renaissance, a period of incredible change and challenge to traditional thought.
Phillippus Aureolus was born in Switzerland (Figure 2.1), a year after Columbus sailed in
1493. He took the pseudonym of Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim and still later
invented the name Paracelsus (1493-1541). This name may signify his desire to move
beyond the Roman philosopher and medical writer Aulus Cornelius Celsus (CcAD3-64),
who promoted cleanliness and recommend the washing of wounds with an antiseptic such
as vinegar. Paracelsus’s claim to toxicology is that he elegantly stated the principle of
dose-response as “AI] substances are poisons; there is none, which is not a poison. The
right dose differentiates a poison from a remedy.” This often-used quote accurately states
that too much of anything, even drinking too much water, can be harmful. (It should be
noted that too little of some substances can also be harmful, such as water.)
What Paracelsus failed to emphasize is the variation in sensitivity of the individual. A bee
sting or a peanut can be deadly for some individual while only annoying or even tasty for
most people. There are now numerous examples demonstrating that the developing infant
is very sensitive to the poisonous effects of a substance that does not harm the adult. For
example, alcohol consumption during pregnancy can result in permanent harm to the
infant without affecting the mother. The brain of the developing infant is sensitive to low
levels of lead exposure, which is not the case for the adult. Another approach to the
principle of dose / response might look like this: “The sensitivity of the individual
differentiates a poison from a remedy. The fundamental principle of toxicology is the
individual’s response to a dose.” The principle of dose / response is only useful when
linked to the sensitivity of the individual to a particular substance.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 2 of 24

Figure 2.1: Paracelsus
= fALTERIVS NON SELGNLSVVSESSEPOTE ST
hee § ory He n u 1S portrait, Parace sus 1S Surrounded Dy
52854 ae Da cmaeas various philosophical symbols. From Paracelsus:
|e = ee 8 ae yi e Le Etliche Tractaten, zum ander Mal in Truck
gl a auszgangen. Vom Podagra und seinem Speciebus
2p ~\\) f irr : (Coln, 1567). Washington University Collection.
S| <7 \G A\ J tes | B Ws (from web site
s - AM my (he oy) http://beckerexhibits.wustl.edu/rare/collections/sch
| Piece a a) | lueter.html
Gaa~
SI SE
JAVREOLV'S_PHILIPPV.S“THEOPHRAST Usa gO
Individual sensitivity to a hazardous agent depends on age, genetics, gender, current or
prior illness, nutrition, and current or history of exposure to chemical agents. Age is
important factor for the very young or the elderly for very different reasons. The
developing nervous system of the infant is more susceptible than the mature nervous
system to a range of agents. Our metabolism of agents slows as we age and our bodies
again become more vulnerable to the effects of an agent. Our gender and genetics dictate
our ability to metabolize agents either more quickly or even not at all. For example, some
people metabolize alcohol more slowly that other people because of their genetics. All
these factors are important as we judge our susceptibility to a particular hazard.
There are many familiar hazards in our lives, some easier to evaluate than others. An
agent or situation is hazardous when it can produce an adverse or undesirable effect.
Hazard is a property of a particular agent or situation. Early in our lives we learn about
the hazards of crossing the street or falling off a ladder or stumbling down the stairs.
Learning about the hazards of a chemical agent is not so easy. Defining the hazard of a
chemical agent requires experience in human exposures or careful study in experimental
models. Through personal experience we gain an understanding of the hazards of some
agents like alcohol or caffeine.
We routinely combine our knowledge of hazard, exposure, and individual susceptibility
to judge the possibility or risk of harm. A young person judges the speed of the
approaching car and decides to run across the street while an elderly person waits for the
traffic light to change. This decision is based on a judgment about the risk of being struck
by the car. An experienced mountain climber will judge the risk of harm on a difficult
climb very differently from someone with no experience. Judging the risk of harm from a
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 3 of 24

chemical agent is often far more difficult because the adverse effects may not be
immediately obvious or may depend on individual sensitivity.
The ability of an agent to damage to the nervous system or of causing cancer 10 years
after exposure is clearly not obvious. The formal process of determining the potential of
agent to cause harm 1s called risk assessment. The risk assessment process is in itself
complicated and often controversial because needed data may not be available or there is
conflicting information. Risk assessment is the process of combining all the known
information about the hazard of and exposure to an agent and making a determination of
the potential for harm to people, animals or the environment. The next step 1s risk
management.
Risk management combines the risk assessment with economic, political, public opinion
and other consideration to determine a course of action. These judgments seldom satisfy
everyone. The principles of toxicology form the foundation for the risk assessment and
ultimately for the risk management decisions. Individual and community involvement in
the decision-making process is a critical part of developing sound policies to minimize
risks to people and the environment.
Dose / Response
The two most important words in toxicology are dose and response; in other words, how
much of an agent will produce what reaction. In toxicology, the focus is usually on
adverse reaction or response, but it is equally useful to consider a full range of responses
from desirable to undesirable. Experience teaches us how to moderate the dose to achieve
a desired result or avoid an undesirable effect. Eating one apple is beneficial, but eating
five apples may produce a stomachache. One cup of coffee in the morning may be just
right, but if you drink three cups too quickly you will suffer the consequences. For light-
skinned people, acquiring a tan without getting sunburned requires careful management
of exposure to the sun. While Paracelsus stated correctly that the “... dose differentiates a
poison from a remedy”, it is the individual that must constantly be aware of the dose and
his or her particular response.
Defining the dose is a critical first step in the effort to predict a response. Dose is the
amount of exposure to an agent, a quantitative measure of the exposure related to the
subject or individual. For a chemical agent or drug the dose is the amount of the material
in relation to body weight. Typically, the amount of material is measured in grams or
thousandths of a gram (milligrams, mg) and body weight is measured in kilograms (kg),
equal to one thousand grams. The dose is the amount of material consumed divided by
body weight or mg/kg.
Calculating the dose
Oral dose = amount of material consumed (mg) / body weight (kg)
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 4 of 24

By knowing just a couple of facts we can turn our everyday exposure of caffeine into a
dose. There are approximately 100 mg of caffeine in a cup of coffee. The actual amount
of caffeine in a cup of coffee depends on the coffee bean, how the coffee was prepared
and the size of the cup. An adult weighing 155 Ibs (about 70 kg) consuming this one-cup
of coffee would receive a dose of 100 mg divided by 70 kg, or about 1.4 mg/kg of
caffeine. The importance of including body weight becomes clear if you consider a child
that weighs only 5 kg (11 Ibs). If this child consumed the same cup of coffee, the dose
would be 100 mg /5 kg or 20 mg/kg, more than ten times higher than the adult.
The difficult part of calculating the dose is often determining the exact amount of
exposure to the agent. The amount of caffeine in a cup of coffee varies depending on the
bean and brewing method, to say nothing of the size of the cup. Very sensitive
instrumentation is now available to analytical chemists to accurately determine the
amount of a specific agent in a material. If the agent is pure, it 1s relatively easy to
determine the amount of the substance and then calculate the dose. Some foods, such as
table salt or sugar, are relatively pure and the dose easily calculated by weighing the
material. Package labeling usually indicates how many milligrams of the drug each pill
contains, so the dose can be calculated. An infant formulation contains much less drug
per pill, but because of the difference in weight between the infant and the adult the dose
may be similar.
Calculating the dose following workplace or environmental exposure can be far more
difficult. If the agent 1s in the air, then calculation of the dose must consider not only the
concentration in the air but also the duration of the exposure, rate of breathing and body
weight. The amount of air inhaled over a period of time is estimated from laboratory data.
Given this information, it is possible to estimate the dose according to the following
formula:
Inhalation dose (mg/kg) =
Air concentration of agent (mg/ml) X volume of air inhaled per hour (ml/hr) X
duration of exposure (hr) / body weight (kg)

For non-chemical exposures, other variables and different units of measurement are
required. For example, exposure to sunlight could be measured in hours, but to determine
the dose would require knowing the intensity of the light as well as the exposed skin
surface area. For example, to determine a dose of sunlight requires knowing the number
of hours of exposure, the intensity of the light as well as the skin surface area.
Workplace and environmental exposures are often repeated and ongoing over an
extended period of time. The health effects of repeated long-term exposures can be very
different from one short-term exposure.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 5 of 24

Duration of exposure, frequency of exposure and time between exposures are important
determinants of dose and response. Four beers in one hour would produce a very different
response than four beers over four days. Many years of repeated high levels of alcohol
exposure can lead to serious liver damage as well as other health complications quite
different from the short-term consequences of one exposure to a high level of alcohol.
Acute exposure 1s a single or very limited number of exposures over a short period of
time. Chronic exposure 1s repeated exposure over a long period of time. The effects of
acute or chronic exposure, as in the case of alcohol, are often very different. For many
drugs, we are looking for the immediate or acute response following exposure. We
consume common painkillers with the desire to quickly stop our headache. Long-term
repeated use, however, can have undesirable effects on the stomach or liver. Tobacco
users desire the acute effect of the nicotine but inevitably suffer the chronic effects of
long-term use such as lung cancer and heart disease. It is also possible to have a delayed
response to an acute exposure. For example, a laboratory researcher died several months
after an acute exposure to a small amount of ethyl mercury. Detailed knowledge about
the hazards of a substance is necessary in evaluating exposure and effect or dose/response
relationships. This includes information about the consequences of acute or chronic
exposure.
There is often a range of responses associated with any particular agent. The response
that occurs will vary with the dose, the duration of exposure, and the individual. The
acute response to a single dose is often the easiest to characterize, but the response to
multiple exposures over a long period of time may be the most important. An emergency
response worker that 1s exposed acutely to a solvent in the air may have her or his
judgment impaired, resulting in a serious mistake. However, over the long term this
exposure is of no consequence, assuming the worker survives any mistake in judgment.
On the other hand, long-term exposure to coal dust can lead to black lung and severe
disability. For a long time, it was thought that the only serious complication from
childhood lead exposure was death resulting from high exposure. Subsequent research
demonstrated that even small amounts of lead exposure during childhood could result in
brain damage that lasts a lifetime. Determining what responses are most important is a
central aspect of many debates in toxicology.
Demonstrating Dose Response
In general, it is true that for any individual, the greater the dose the greater the response.
This concept is illustrated in Figure 1 and can be easily demonstrated in the home or
classroom with a few simple items (see appendix — Dose-Response Demonstration).
Caffeine, which distributes evenly throughout total body water, is a good illustration of
dose-response. It is important to know if a substance distributes into body water because
we made up of approximately 75% water. A can of cola contains approximately 50 mg of
caffeine (about 4 mg per ounce of cola). Consumption of the first can of cola delivers an
exposure of 50 mg per total body weight. Assuming a 100 kg person, this would be
50/100 mg/kg or 0.5 mg/kg. Consumption of three cans of cola would result in a dose of
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 6 of 24

1.5 mg/kg and six cans of cola a dose of 3 mg/kg of caffeine. Because caffeine distributes
evenly throughout total body water you can almost imagine the change in shade depicted
in Figure 2.2 as the concentration of the caffeine in the blood. An individual’s response to
the caffeine varies with the dose and corresponding amount of circulating caffeine.
The right panel (Figure 2.2) illustrates the effect of body size on the dose. When the adult
and the child receive the same amount of caffeine, the exposure is the same but the dose
is dramatically different. A child that weighs only 10 kg receives a dose of 5 mg/kg after
one can of cola. An adult that weights 100 kg must drink 10 cans of cola to receive an
equivalent dose. Body size is a critical factor in determining dose and any subsequent
response. For the equivalent exposure to any substance such as lead or a pesticide, the
child will receive a much greater dose than the adult. As we shall discover, there are other
important physiological factors that also make children more susceptible than adults to
the effects of an agent.

The importance of dose The Importance of size

eo @@
® Pd e°e
O ® 6
Sa we an
The larger the dose, the greater the effect The smaller the size, the greater the
effect
Figure 2.2 The Effect of Dose and Body Size on Response
For a given body size, the larger dose produces a greater effect (left), and for a given
exposure, the smaller body size receives a greater effect and larger dose (right).
The next figure (Figure 2.3) graphically illustrates the critical relationship between dose
and response. In this case, we define the response as difficulty in walking and the dose of
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 7 of 24

All Effected
o 100
‘=
=<
§ 7S
2 5
E Wa
Q Amount half
+ are effected
a 25
O
°
- 0 —
0 1 2 3 A - 6 7 8
Glasses of Wine
Figure 2.3: Dose Response Graph for Drinking Wine
Dose response function for difficulty in walking and number of glasses of wine
consumed. This is an idealized curve, but it illustrates the principle that at low
doses (i.e. few glasses) there is little response, then an increasing response to a
maximum response. Note that this figure does not take into consideration body
weight or any other variables such as gender or frequency of exposure (i.e. time
between drinks).
or exposure to alcohol as a glass of wine. To change from exposure to dose we would
need to know the body weight and amount of alcohol in the glass of wine. If we selected
a group of people at random and offered them wine, no one (most likely) would have
difficulty walking after one drink (depending of course on how big the glass was). The
number of people responding, or in this case having difficulty walking, is a percentage of
the total number of people in our study population. As exposure to wine increases, more
and more people would have difficulty walking until finally everyone was affected.
In toxicology, the dose at which one half or 50% of the population is affected is often
calculated and used to compare the toxicity of different agents. In this example, 50% of
the population is affected after exposure to 4.5 glasses of wine. The vertical bars
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 8 of 24

represent the variability from one test group to the next. If we repeat this experiment
with a different group of people, the actual data points could be somewhat different, but
should generally fall within the range spanned by the vertical bars or error bars. There are
many possible reasons for this variation, including body weight (which changes dose),
food consumption prior to drinking, past use of alcohol, genetics, gender, as well as
others. Technically this figure is an exposure response graph because the dose is not
calculated; the number of glasses of wine represents a measure of exposure not dose.
All Effected
100 —-
®
i) 15
c
O
a. 50
7) Half Effected
iY
o 625
o~
0 —@—_
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Dose (mg/kg body weight)
Increasing dose ———__»
Figure 2.4: An Idealized Dose / Response Graph
The horizontal axis indicates the dose in mg/kg of body weight, while the vertical axis is
the percent of maximum response. For very low dose there is no or little response. The
response increases with the dose until the maximum response is reached and increasing
the dose has no additional effect.
Figure 2.4 demonstrates an “S”’-shaped idealized dose / response graph, which 1s typical
of most types of exposure. In this figure, the percentage responding is plotted against the
dose in mg/kg. This “S” shaped cure illustrates that at low doses there is little or no
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 9 of 24

response while at high doses all individuals respond or demonstrate the effect. The line
drawn at 50% responses determines at what dose 50% of the population would
demonstrate this response. In this situation, 50% of the subjects respond at a dose of 42
mg/kg, while 99% of the subjects responded at 90 mg/kg. It is important to emphasize
that if we repeat this experiment the results would be slightly different. Each individual
varies from one time to the next and there is even greater variability between individuals.
Variability is a consistent theme in biology, complicating data analysis and interpretation
of results. These variations lead to the need for statistical evaluation of data.
Hazard and Risk
The biological effects of an agent often span a broad range from beneficial to harmful,
depending on the dose and individual sensitivity. The scientific discipline of toxicology
developed in an effort to understand and characterize the potentially harmful or
hazardous properties of an agent. Risk is the probability of injury, disease, loss of
function, or death for an individual or population exposed to a hazardous substance or
situation. An agent or situation that can produce or cause a harmful or adverse effect is a
Hazard. Hazard is an intrinsic property of a substance and any particular substance may
have a range of hazards associated with it depending upon specific conditions or
circumstances. On a daily basis, we routinely confront a range of potentially hazardous
agents, including the fire we cook with, the electricity that lights our homes, the
household chemicals used for cleaning, the chemicals that run our cars, drugs in the
medicine we take, and the list goes on. We use these potentially hazardous agents but are
careful to avoid conditions that will result in the expression of their hazardous properties.
Gasoline is a good example of an agent with multiple hazards. We depend on its
flammability to make our cars run but that same flammability can be hazardous in an
uncontrolled fire. Sniffing gasoline, undertaken by some people for effects on the nervous
system, represents a very different hazard. Problems develop when we do not fully
appreciate an agent’s potential to cause harm or the conditions under which the agent can
cause harm. Problems can also occur when products or mechanical systems malfunction.
In the past, the hazard associated with any particular substance was related to immediate
or obvious harm. As our knowledge and experience increase, so too does our appreciation
of an agent’s ability to produce unexpected consequences or harm. Take for example
DDT, a very powerful pesticide useful in the eradication of mosquitoes. As Rachel
Carson so eloquently pointed out, DDT devastated bird populations not directly but
indirectly by thinning eggshells to such an extent that the eggshells failed. This resulted
in a devastating decline in bird populations, particularly for birds consuming animals.
Still later we learned that DDT was a very persistent chemical and highly soluble in fat.
DDT thus accumulated up the food chain and in this case birds at the top of the food
chain were most affected. Humans are also at the top of the food chain, and through a
variety of means, DDT ends up in the food supply and becomes stored in body fat. When
women are breast-feeding, fat and DDT are mobilized and become the food of nursing
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 10 of 24

infants, which represents a large dose to a small infant. We are still unsure of the
consequences of fetal exposure to DDT and its effects on the developing organism. Many
other fat-soluble chemicals, such as dioxin and PCBs are known to contaminate breast
milk. Lead is another example of a major public health disaster that occurred because the
consequences of low-level lead exposure to the developing nervous system were not
appreciated.
Recognition of the potential harmful effects of agents from drugs to pesticides resulted in
new research efforts as well as the formation of government agencies responsible for
regulating hazardous substances. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is
responsible for ensuring that all drugs and food additives are both efficacious and safe.
The Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) establishes rules to control
or limit exposures to a variety of chemicals in the workplace, based upon toxicology data.
The Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC) works to reduce injury from
consumer products. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) governs the
release of chemicals into the environment to protect the soil, water and air. It also
regulates the cleanup of hazardous chemicals in the environment.
While science plays an important role in characterizing the harmful effects of an agent,
society also establishes laws to regulate or limit exposure to known hazards. Tobacco and
alcohol consumption are legal despite recognized hazards and considerable cost to
society. It was only recently that the government forced the tobacco industry into
acknowledging the addictive properties of nicotine and began to recover health costs
through litigation. While the adverse effects of excessive alcohol consumption have been
recognized for a long time, it was only in the 1970’s that birth defects related to alcohol
consumption during pregnancy were recognized. In contrast, the U.S. government has
declared that marijuana and many other recreational drugs are illegal based upon their
known hazard characteristics. Obviously, this 1s a controversial area, with many people
(and even countries) having very different opinions and laws.
Hazard and risk are linked by exposure. Reducing the hazard, the exposure, or both can
lower risk. If there is no exposure, then there is no risk or possibility of harm. Knowledge
and experience allow one to judge the potential for harm or risk associated with exposure
to a substance. In this way we are all toxicologists, always judging the potential for harm
against the benefit of exposure. This is often easier said than done, but being
knowledgeable about an agent can lead to the development of specific strategies to
reduce the potential for harm. Since one cannot necessarily foresee all possible exposures
to a hazardous substance, choosing less hazardous substances 1s also a vital part of risk
reduction.
The beneficial use of radiation is one of the best examples of how careful characterization
of the hazard is essential for its safe use. A radioactive substance can be safely stored or
transported if appropriately contained. Depending on the characteristics of the radioactive
material, it can be safely handled by using appropriate shielding and safety precautions.
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 11 of 24

Laboratory workers usually wear special badges that quantify radiation exposure to
ensure that predetermined levels of exposure, which are considered safe, are not
exceeded. Unfortunately, after more than 50 years, society has not yet been able to design
and implement a safe way to dispose of radioactive waste. The hazardous properties of
radiation are explored further in a subsequent chapter.
Historically, potentially toxic agents have been ranked by their lethality, or the amount of
material that causes death. In this measure, hazard is defined only as death, obviously
only the grossest measure of an agent’s effect. Because of individual variability or
susceptibility, a standardized measure is the dose (in units of mg/kg) that produces death
in half of the subjects, a 50% response. This is called an LDS0O or lethal dose for 50% of
the population. The LD50 is one measure of the toxicity of a substance, its capacity for
causing illness or death. The LD50 is usually determined on populations of test animals
such as rats and mice. Determination of an LD50 is based on a single acute exposure to
an agent and the single response of death. Although the LD50 can be useful in comparing
the gross hazards of agents, it is not necessarily relevant to a response produced by low-
level chronic exposure. For example, the LD50 of lead is not particularly important,
given its adverse effects on the developing nervous system even at very low levels of
exposure. LD50s are misleading if used as the only characterization of the toxicity of a
substance. Aspirin is a commonly used over-the-counter medicine, while DDT is a
pesticide that has been banned because of its toxic effects and persistence in the
environment. Yet they have similar LD50s.
Table 2.1 lists the LD50s of a variety of common agents. Since the LD50 is the amount
of material required to produce death, a higher LD50 implies a lower toxicity and vice
versa. Note how high the LDS50 is for alcohol, which is fortunate given its widespread
consumption. This explains why so few people die as a result of acute alcohol
consumption. Generally, people pass out at high blood alcohol levels and die not due
directly to alcohol but from suffocating on their own vomit as the body tries to rid itself
of this toxicant. Note also the low LDSO (high toxicity) for nicotine, the most active and
addictive ingredient in cigarettes.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 12 of 24

Table 2.1. Approximate Acute LD50s of Some Common Chemical Agents

Agent LD-50 (mg/kg)

Ethyl alcohol 10,000

Salt (sodium chloride) 4,000

Iron (Ferrous sulfate) 1,500

Morphine 900

Mothballs (paradichlorobenzene) 500

Aspirin 250

DDT 250

Cyanide 10

Nicotine i

Tetrodotoxin (from fish) 0.01

Dioxin (TCDD) 0.001 (for some species)

Botulinum Toxin 0.00001
Fortunately, the LD50 is no longer recognized as an adequate or even particularly useful
assessment of an agent’s ability to cause harm. Toxicologists have developed a wide
array of tests to determine if an agent can produce an adverse effect. A variety of tests are
performed to evaluate the potential harmful effects across all organ systems. If any hint
of adverse effects 1s observed, further testing is done to carefully characterize and
understand the effect. Ultimately, the hazard must be judged on the sensitivity of the
individual. Moderate consumption of alcohol can present few hazards for an adult, but
this same amount of alcohol can harm the developing fetus. Lead has many beneficial
uses and has long been recognized as a hazard, but it is only relatively recently that
harmful effects on the developing nervous system have been characterized. At what point
does caffeine produce an undesirable effect and another cup of coffee become something
to avoid? How much of a hazard is caffeine? To answer these questions, we need to know
more about how the body metabolizes or breaks down chemical agents.
Routes of Exposure and Absorption
An agent exerts its effects when it enters or comes into contact with the body, in other
words, when an individual has been exposed to it. Although we are primarily concerned
with effects on humans, the same principles apply to all living organisms and, indeed, to
the entire environment. Exposure, like many of the terms in toxicology, has several
difference aspects, the most important of which are 1) route of exposure, 2) frequency of
exposure, and 3) duration of exposure. Exposure is also affected by absorption. Even
though we may come in contact with an agent, if little 1s taken up into the body (or
absorbed), there is little effect. For example, the metallic mercury from a broken
thermometer, if swallowed, 1s very poorly absorbed by the gut and will be excreted in the
feces. However, if this same amount of mercury were allowed to evaporate and be
inhaled, there would be very serious health consequences. This example shows that
metabolism and excretion modify absorption. What is not absorbed (and even some of

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 13 of 24

what is absorbed) may be excreted from the body by various routes, including the urine,
feces, and sweat or through exhalation. Excretion reduces the effect because it lowers the
amount of toxicant in the body, thus reducing exposure to sensitive organs.
There are three main routes of exposure: 1) skin (or dermal) exposure, 2) lung
(inhalation) exposure, or 3) oral (gastrointestinal) exposure. A fourth route of exposure is
by injection, which is used for delivery of drugs or medication that cannot be taken
orally. Injections can take several forms. An injection directly into a blood vessel
bypasses most of the absorption barriers and the drug will have almost full and immediate
access to the most organs of the body. Some medications are injected into the muscle
(intramuscularly or IM), which slows absorption as the drug is slowly taken up by the
blood supplying the muscle. Finally, injections can be made just under the skin
(subcutaneous or SC). This method is commonly used for allergy testing or tuberculin
(TB) tests.
Skin is the largest organ of the body and does an amazing job of protecting us from most
agents. However, the skin is an important route of exposure to some agents and also a site
of highly adverse reactions. For example, the adverse effect of too much exposure to the
sun is well known. In many cases, the skin is an excellent barrier to chemical agents, but
some solvents can readily penetrate the skin. Solvents such as gasoline or chemical
cleaners can readily remove the natural oils of the skin and result in adverse skin reaction,
as well as chemical absorption. The labels of many pesticides state that gloves and other
skin protection should be worn because of the risk of pesticide absorption through the
skin or allergic reaction such as arash. A number of medications can now be applied
through a skin patch, such as nicotine patches to curb the desire to smoke cigarettes. The
advantage of a skin patch in that the drug will be absorbed a constant slow rate, thus
keeping the drug blood levels relatively constant. This system helps smokers by keeping
their blood nicotine levels elevated and constant, curbing the desire to smoke.
Inhalation is an excellent route of exposure to many agents, including the oxygen
essential for life. The lungs are very rich in blood to facilitate the absorption of oxygen
and thus allow the rapid absorption of other agents directly into the bloodstream, quickly
producing an effect. Carbon monoxide is a potentially lethal gas that can be generated in
the home by poorly ventilated heaters, faulty furnaces, or a car idling in an attached
garage. Carbon monoxide is readily taken up by the blood cells by the same mechanism
as oxygen. In fact, carbon monoxide binds to the hemoglobin in the blood cells better
than oxygen, SO exposure can cause serious injury and even death through lack of oxygen
intake. Cigarette smokers become dependent on the nicotine absorbed through the lungs
from the tobacco smoke. Marijuana users hold their breaths to allow additional
absorption of the active ingredient THC. The lungs can also excrete some agents,
although this is usually in very small amounts. The excretion of alcohol forms the basis
for the alcohol Breathalyzer test, which quantifies the amount of alcohol in the body by
measuring what is exhaled.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 14 of 24

Ingestion of substances orally allows absorption from the stomach and intestines. This is
a critical route of exposure for many agents, from essential carbohydrates, proteins, and
vitamins, to unwanted pesticides and lead. All that is ingested is not necessarily absorbed,
and absorption can be dependent on age. For example, in an adult, only about 10% of the
lead ingested is absorbed, but up to 50% may be absorbed by an infant or pregnant
women. In this case, unabsorbed lead is passed through the intestine and excreted in the
feces. The increased absorption of certain agents at different times of life is related to the
body’s demand for important elements. In this situation, the intestines are able to absorb
increased amounts of calcium and iron but will take lead as a poor substitute (more on
this in the lead chapter). Alcohol and caffeine are readily absorbed by the stomach,
making for two of the most popular drugs in our culture. Oral exposure also occurs
through our food and drinking water, so it is imperative to have unpolluted water and a
safe food supply. It is also a good idea to wash your hand before eating or touching food
so that what may be on your skin does not ride along on the food you eat.
The other two aspects of exposure are frequency and duration. Frequency can refer not
only to the number of times the exposure occurred, but also to the time between
exposures. For example, drinking four beers within 15 minutes 1s quite different from
drinking four beers in four days. Frequent exposure of a short duration results in rapidly
elevated blood levels of any agent (assuming it’s absorbed). Two quick cups of coffee in
the morning serve to elevate blood caffeine levels, whereas slowly sipping a cup of
coffee will not have the desired stimulator effect. It takes approximately 30 minutes to
absorb the caffeine from a cup of coffee and reach your peak blood caffeine levels. The
harmful or toxic effects of an agent are often dependent on the frequency of exposure and
the time between exposures.
Duration of exposure is a closely related factor. In toxicology, duration is usually divided
into three periods: 1) acute exposure (usually just one or two exposures of short
duration); 2) sub-chronic exposure (multiple exposures over many days or perhaps
months); and 3) chronic exposure (long-term or even lifetime exposure). The terms acute
and chronic are also used to characterize the time delay between exposure and the onset
of symptoms. Acute effects are those noticed directly following exposure and are usually
easily related to the agent. The chronic or long-term effects of an agent may occur years
later and are often very difficult to attribute to a particular cause. The acute effects of
alcohol consumption or exposure to the solvent in glue are obvious in the drunkenness
produced. The effects of chronic exposure to these compounds, as seen by an alcoholic,
are very different: specifically, cirrhosis of the liver. The chronic effect of childhood lead
exposure can be impaired learning that will be a factor throughout an individual’s
lifetime. The chronic effects of food additives and pesticides are evaluated in lifetime
animal studies to assess the carcinogenic (cancer-causing) potential of these agents.
There are two types of exposure that deserve special attention: fetal exposure during
pregnancy and exposure of the brain. For a long time, it was thought that the placenta
offered the developing fetus significant protection from hazardous agents. We know now
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 15 of 24

that the majority of agents readily cross the placenta and expose the developing fetus to
whatever the mother has been exposed to. The fluid surrounding the infant (amniotic
fluid) will have the same level of drug as the mother’s blood for compounds that readily
distribute throughout body water, such as caffeine. Thus, the infant is literally swimming
in caffeine and its metabolites. Fetal methylmercury can actually be higher than that of
the mother, because the developing infant acts as a storage site for maternal mercury. The
brain, on the other hand, in the adult but not in the fetus, is afforded some extra protection
from hazardous agents. This barrier is known as the blood-brain barrier because of its
ability to keep some agents from moving from the blood vessels into the brain tissue.
This barrier works primarily on large molecules but does not stop water-soluble agents
such as caffeine from entering the brain and producing its stimulatory effect. While there
are obviously many good aspects of the blood-brain barrier, it has also proven to be very
challenging to move desirable drugs into the brain to treat disease.
From a scientific perspective, we primarily work with single exposures to chemicals to
understand how the body reacts to a specific chemical. In real life, however, we are often
exposed to a mixture of chemical agents. Multiple agents may interact and effect
absorption or how the body reacts to the chemical. The body has a very sophisticated
system to metabolize and eliminate chemicals form the body; this system plays an
important role in protecting us from hazardous substances.
Metabolism, Distribution and Excretion
Fortunately, living organisms have developed elaborate systems to defend themselves
against toxic agents. Metabolism refers to an organism’s ability to change a substance
into different chemical parts or metabolites that are usually less toxic. The body
metabolizes the food we consume to recover energy and basic elements necessary for our
well-being. In toxicology, metabolism refers to the body’s ability to reduce an agent into
parts that are either less harmful or more readily excreted, a process called detoxification.
The most common route of excretion is through urine, although some agents can be
excreted in the feces, sweat or even the breath. For toxic agents, metabolism is beneficial,
but it can also reduce the benefits of a drug needed to aid in the recovery from an illness.
Distribution refers to where an agent goes in the body. Some agents such as pesticides
and PCBs accumulate in the fat. Other agents such as lead can accumulate in the bone in
the place of calcium. Agents stored in the body my never be fully excreted; as we age we
continue to accumulate a body burden of these stored agents like PCB or lead.
Metabolism, distribution, and excretion are linked aspects that are essential to predicting
the adverse effects of an agent and thus determining the risk of exposure to it.
Although most cells in the body are capable of metabolism, the primary organ for
detoxification is the liver. The liver has a variety of specialized cells that produce
enzymes to aid in the metabolism of toxic agents. These enzymes can break down toxic
agents into smaller elements, making them less toxic. In some cases, the compounds are
changed so that they are more easily filtered by the kidney and excreted in the urine.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 16 of 24

Alcohol and caffeine, for example, are metabolized in the liver. The liver is a remarkable
organ but can be permanently damaged by diseases such as hepatitis or through long-term
alcohol consumption. Liver damage can be detected in the blood by looking for elevated
levels of compounds produced by the liver. Insurance companies use liver function tests
to evaluate the possibility of chronic drug consumption.
Not all agents can be readily metabolized. The toxic metals lead and mercury are
elements that cannot be degraded but must still be removed from the body. Another
important mechanism of detoxification is the attachment or binding of another compound
to a toxic chemical to make it easier for the kidney to filter the compound out of the
blood and excrete in the urine. A primary purpose of the kidney is to screen the blood of
waste products and concentrate them in the urine for excretion, as occurs, for example,
with mercury. Caffeine is excreted in the urine at approximately the same concentration
of the blood because the kidney cannot concentrate caffeine. Vitamins, however, are
readily concentrated and excess quickly eliminated in the urine.
Chelators bind metals so that they are more readily excreted in the urine. In the past,
chelators were routinely prescribed to people with elevated blood lead levels in an effort
to accelerate the excretion of lead in the urine. Unless the blood levels are excessively
elevated the current treatment is to determine the source of the lead exposure and take
remedial action. The problem with chelators is that they are non-specific and bind useful
agents such as calcium.
Half-life is a measure of the length of time an agent stays in the body before being
metabolized and eliminated. More precisely, the half-life of an agent refers to the time it
takes to reduce the level of the agent by one half. For example, if the amount of caffeine
in your blood were measured as 12 units (the particular units are not important), it would
take approximately five hours for that level to be reduced to six units. In this case, five
hours represents the half-life of caffeine. Another five hours later the amount would be
reduced in half to three, and so on until it approaches zero. The half-life of an agent,
either toxic or beneficial, is a critical aspect of its ability to produce and maintain an
effect. There can be considerable individual variability in the ability to metabolize an
agent. This variability is reflected in the half-life for that particular individual. Someone
who rapidly metabolizes caffeine (meaning someone for whom caffeine has a short half-
life, say three hours) may want to drink more coffee more rapidly to elevate and maintain
high caffeine blood levels and achieve the desired effect. Others may find that one-cup of
coffee every 3 or 4 hours is adequate. A variety of factors, such as liver disease or even
pregnancy, can decrease the metabolism or excretion of an agent and thus increase the
half-life. During pregnancy, the half-life of caffeine increases to approximately 7 hours,
resulting in higher blood caffeine levels for a longer period of time. While the half-life of
agents such as caffeine and alcohol are relatively short, many of the most serious
environmental toxicants have much longer half-live values. For example, the half-life of
lead is approximately 30 days. Many pesticides and PCBs are also readily stored in the
body and have corresponding long half-live values. Careful consideration of the half-life
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 17 of 24

of a drug is an important aspect during medical treatment. The half-life of a hypothetical
drug is illustrated in Figure 2.5.
How Long It Takes To Go
=,
— 14
E
= 12
—
—
Oo 6 68
=
© 6
r=
g 4 T/
c 2 ]
oO
O 0
0123 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Time (hrs)
Figure 2.5. A characterization of Half-life
A substance is consumed at time zero (for example, drink a cup of coffee and
we could measure blood caffeine concentrations) and blood samples are
collected at every hour. Concentration of the agent is plotted against time. The
black line represents the half-life when the blood concentration as dropped by
one half its maximum. Thus, in this example, the half-life is 4 hours.
The ability of an agent to get into a specific organ of the body often dictates its effect. For
example, alcohol and caffeine would not be consumed were they not readily distributed
to the brain, where they produce a considerable effect. As already mentioned, lead can be
exchanged for calcium and accumulate in the bone, while many pesticides and PCBs are
stored in fat cells. These patterns of distribution and the storage of compounds in the
body can have serious toxicological implications. During rapid weight loss, excess
toxicants can be redistributed into the blood supply as fat is metabolized. Lead in the
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 18 of 24

bone can also be mobilized if there is heavy demand for calcium, as occurs during
pregnancy. To further complicate matters, each area of the body —in this case the fat and
bone—can have its own half-life that can differ from that of blood. The half-life of lead
in the blood is measured in days, while that in bone is measured in years.
Sensitivity, Susceptibility and Variability
Susceptibility refers to the differences in sensitivity to toxic agents, causing some people
to suffer greater effects than others from the same exposure. This is a key concept in
toxicology and risk analysis/management. Susceptibility is primarily related to several
factors, including age, sex, health, and genetic background. Sensitivity is related to
susceptibility but generally refers to special cases of extreme susceptibility to certain
agents by some people. Someone who is allergic to bee stings can have a fatal reaction
when stung by just one bee, while for most others a sting is of little concern. Enhanced
sensitivity to a compound can develop after repeated exposure to it or a similar agent.
Allergies to animals such as cats and dogs are examples of specific sensitivities to an
agent called animal dander. Other individuals may develop a sensitivity to dust mites.
In general, the young and elderly are most susceptible to the adverse effects of an agent.
The young, particularly the very young, are more susceptible because the organs are still
rapidly developing, and dividing cells are more easily harmed than mature cells. For
example, lead affects the developing nervous system to a much greater degree than the
adult brain. The brain is rapidly growing during and after birth, particularly throughout
the first 7 years of life. The brain is not fully developed until the late teens. During the
first year of life the metabolism of agents by the liver is also reduced. This is why the
half-life of caffeine can be measured in days for the newborn while it is hours for the
adult. The elderly are more sensitive to agents because of decreased ability to metabolize
them and decreased ability to compensate for the effects.
Gender can also play an important role in susceptibility to agents, in part due to hormonal
influences. The classic example is the female birth control pill. In this case, a very small
exposure to specific hormones has a very large influence on fertility. Other agents such as
PCBs also appear to affect some of the female hormones. Some athletes use hormones
called steroids to increase muscle mass. These agents have different toxic side effects for
males and females. Females have additional issues related to pregnancy. Pregnancy
causes many changes in physiology that can alter the absorption, distribution, and
metabolism of an agent and thus dramatically influence its effects. For example, during
pregnancy there is a decrease in liver metabolism that increases the half-life of caffeine.
This means that a pregnant woman will maintain higher blood caffeine levels for a longer
period of time than when not pregnant, resulting in increased caffeine exposure to the
developing infant. Agents stored in the fat, such as pesticides and PCBs can be mobilized
during lactation and thus passed on to a nursing infant. Calcitum mobilization during
pregnancy can also redistribute lead from the bone if there has been previous lead
exposure.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 19 of 24

Personal health is another factor that can influence susceptibility to an agent. A
compromised liver or immune system can make exposure to even low levels of an agent
completely intolerable. Someone who is diabetic may find sugar toxic and may enjoy
considerable benefit from artificial sweeteners. On the other hand, someone who cannot
metabolize phenylalanine, a naturally occurring and essential substance, may find the
common artificial sweetener in some soda toxic. An individual who suffers from asthma
may find exposure to wood smoke extremely harmful, whereas many people can tolerate
short exposures to it fairly well. (Wood smoke is nevertheless toxic in either case, and
chronic exposure can lead to health problems.) The physiological changes of disease or
chronic illness are thus very important considerations in assessing the exposure to an
agent.
Finally, our genetic variability may make us more or less prone to disease or the effects
of a toxic agent. Some can tolerate caffeine before bed, while for others such exposure
would result in a restless night. It is always important to consider the individual and the
individual characteristics of a situation.
Applying the Principles

Multiple Chemical Exposure
In the real world, we are not exposed to only one chemical at a time. The air we breathe
contains many separate chemicals. Indoor air in homes can contain chemicals from
smoke, molds, carpet glue, mothballs, and cleaning products, to name only a few.
Determining the risk from such multiple exposures is difficult because the body does not
necessarily respond to each chemical in the mixture in the same way it would if the others
were not present. Sometimes one chemical can cause the body to respond more strongly
to another chemical generating a synergistic effect. We know, for example, that exposure
to environmental tobacco smoke greatly increases the risk of cancer from asbestos. The
increase is not additive — that 1s, it 1s not equal to the risk from tobacco plus the risk from
asbestos — but is actually much greater than the sum of the two risks.
There are also cases where exposure to two chemicals reduces toxic effects. Methanol
(wood alcohol) causes blindness if ingested. Methanol poisoning is treated by
administering ethanol (common alcohol), which competes for metabolism in the body,
thus slowing the formation of toxic byproducts of methanol and keeping their levels low
enough to avoid damage to the optic system. This is sometimes referred to as an
antagonistic effect.
When more than two chemicals are involved, the problem of determining risks becomes
increasingly complex. Scientific study of chemical mixtures has been relatively limited
because of the sheer number of combinations possible. Even if the exact effects of

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 20 of 24

exposure to mixtures are unknown, reducing exposure is still a good strategy to lower
risk.
Multiple Chemical Sensitivity
Multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS) is characterized by a variety of adverse effects upon
multiple organs that result from exposure to levels of common foods, drugs, and
chemicals that do not affect most people. Symptoms include headaches, fatigue, lack of
concentration, memory loss, asthma and other often subjective responses following
exposure. MCS has remained controversial because standard medical evaluations, such as
blood biochemical screens, have failed to identify consistent physical or laboratory test
abnormalities that would account for the symptoms.
MCS is thought to develop following sensitization to one chemical, a sensitivity that then
is generalized so that chemicals of a similar class and lower concentrations of exposure
come to elicit the response. Researchers have been working to develop a mechanism of
action for these responses and have focused on the immune system responses and, more
recently, on involvement of the nervous system. Others investigators, while respecting
the symptomatology, postulate that the responses are due to some form of psychological
illnesses. Whatever the mechanism of action, it 1s important to attempt to associate cause
and effect relationships and apply the principles of toxicology. Identification of what
agents may be causing the symptoms can result in plans to reduce exposure to these
agents and thus reduce symptoms and improve the quality of life. In addition, reductions
in the exposure to toxic chemicals for all persons may help reduce the incidence of MCS.
Assessing and Managing Risk

As we have seen, risk is closely related to hazard and is defined as the probability of the
recognized hazard occurring. Risk assessment 1s the process by which the nature and
magnitude of risk are identified, while risk management 1s the process of determining
whether or how much to reduce risk through our actions. Evaluation of the potential
adverse effects of some activity or exposure (risk assessment) is something we all do
informally on a day-to-day basis. What we decide to do is in part the result of an ongoing
risk management decision. It can be as simple as crossing the street against a red light or
as complex as spending the extra money for organically grown foods to reduce our
exposure to pesticides. Many of the risks associated with chemical exposure are indirect
or subtle effects on health; in other words, conditions, situations, or exposures to an agent
that affect the quality of life. Table 2.2 lists some of the factors that can influence a
person’s perceptions and views about health concerns.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 21 of 24

Table 2.2. Considerations that influence acceptability of risk.

More-Acceptable Risk Less-Acceptable Risk

Benefits Understood Benefits Unclear

No Alternatives Alternatives Available

Risk Shared Risk Affects Few

Voluntary Involuntary

Individual Control Uncontrollable

Familiar Unfamiliar

Low Dread High Dread

Affects Everybody Affects Children

Naturally Occurring Human Origin (synthetic)

Little Media Attention High Media Attention

Understood Not Understood

High Trust Low Trust
Risk analysis and risk management play an important role in public policy. These debates
range from the development of environmental impact statements for the location of
buildings to debates on household lead abatement and what chemicals can be allowed in
the food supply. Quality of life issues such as asthma and or loss of mental function are
now recognized as important components of risk assessment. For example, childhood
exposure to lead can result in reduced IQ, which can affect an individual throughout their
lifetime. Similarly, childhood asthma can have a severe impact on an individual’s ability
to play and socialize.
In the past, much of the formal risk assessment concerned an estimation of the risk of
cancer and subsequent death and then deciding what was acceptable. Typically, a risk of
death of less than | in 100,000 (10°) or 1 in 1 million (10°) is considered an “acceptable”
level of risk for exposure to a chemical. In comparison, the risk of death in an automobile
accident is 1 in 4000 and the risk of death from lightning 1s | in 2 million. Comparisons
like those above are sometimes used to argue that the risk of exposure to a chemical agent
is negligible. Such comparisons can be misleading, however, if the conditions of the two
risks are different. For example, if they affect different populations unequally, say falling
disproportionately on those of a particular ethnic background, the risks may be more
likely to be judged unacceptable. Or if one risk is the result of voluntary choice (drinking
alcohol) and another is not (eating food contaminated with bacteria), it cannot be
assumed that an individual will be equally willing to tolerate them.

File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 22 of 24

Risk assessment is a complex area that requires the application of all the principles of
toxicology. It is often divided into four somewhat overlapping areas 1) hazard
identification, 2) dose-response assessment, 3) exposure assessment, and 4) risk
characterization. Hazard identification is the process of collecting and evaluating
information on the effects of an agent on animal or human health and well-being. In most
cases, this involves a careful assessment of the adverse effects and what is the most
sensitive population. The dose-response assessment involves evaluation of the
relationship between dose and adverse effect. Typically, an effort 1s made to determine
the lowest dose or exposure at which an effect is observed. A comparison is often made
between animal data and any human data that might be available. Next is exposure
assessment, in which an evaluation of the likely exposure to any given population is
assessed. Important parameters include the dose, duration, frequency, and route of
exposure. The final step is risk characterization, in which all the above information is
synthesized and a judgment made on what is an acceptable level of human exposure. In
the simplest terms, risk is the product of two factors: hazard and exposure (i.e. hazard x
exposure = risk). In real risk assessments, all hazards may not be known and exposure is
often difficult to quantify precisely. As a result, the calculated risk may not accurately
reflect the real risk. The accuracy of a risk assessment is no better than the data and
assumptions upon which it is based.
Risk management 1s the political or social process of deciding how the benefits balance
the associated risks. Risk management is also concerned with how the public perceives
risk and how we judge and perform our own risk assessments. An example of risk
management was the decision to remove lead from gasoline. After a great deal of
research, it was demonstrated that low levels of lead exposure are harmful to the
developing nervous system. It was then determined that this benefits of removing lead
from gasoline was greater than the costs. A program was then developed to gradually
phase out lead from gasoline in line with the engines of new cars not requiring lead and
the replacement of old cars.
Summary
The principles of toxicology are summarized in as follows: dose / response, risk=
hazard X exposure and individual sensitivity. Many of us have an excellent intuitive
sense of the principles of toxicology from experience with caffeine, alcohol, or other drug
exposures. These experiences form a foundation upon which to build a formal
understanding of toxicology that is applicable to many situations. We make many
personal decisions based on dose/response and risk consideration. Around our home, we
must decide which cleaning products to use or whether to apply pesticides to our lawn or
garden. As citizens, we are also confronted with many broader concerns about
environmental exposures. How much do we invest to limit the spread of environmental
contaminants? Should coal-fired power generating facilities be required to invest in more
sophisticated smoke stack scrubbers to remove mercury? On what basis do we make this
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 23 of 24

decision? Advances in the toxicological sciences along with general advances in the

biological sciences provide new knowledge and understanding upon which to make these

and other decisions. And finally, I hope that beyond the principles of toxicology that you

will find that toxicology is both fun and informative.

References

See chapter | and references from individual chapters.

Reference on specific topics

Low doses

Shaffer, Rachel. (2017). Can low doses of chemicals affect your health? A new report

weighs the evidence. The Conversation. Online: https://theconversation.com/can-low-

doses-of-chemicals-affect-your-health-a-new-report-weighs-the-evidence-82132.

(Accessed: 25 October 2019).

Lanphear, Bruce. (2019). Little Things Matter — Unleashing the Power of Prevention. A

series of short videos. Online: www.littlethingsmatter.ca (Accessed: 25 October 2019).
File: Chapter 2 Principles Tox.ED3.10.20.19.docx — Date: 10/25/2019 — Page 24 of 24

